


Picasso’s painting of a young blond woman with red fingernail polish and Cubist breasts, in a red chair.
“Femme à la montre,” Pablo Picasso’s 1932 portrait of his young mistress at the time, Marie-Thérèse Walter, sold for $139.4 million at Sotheby’s on Wednesday in New York.Credit...Estate of Pablo Picasso/Artists Rights Society, New York; via Sotheby’s

Zachary Small
By Zachary Small
Published Nov. 8, 2023
Updated Nov. 9, 2023, 10:41 p.m. ET
A brilliant blue painting by Pablo Picasso of his young mistress was crowned the prized lot of the November auction season so far after it sold at Sotheby’s in New York for $139.4 million, with buyer’s fees, on Wednesday.

Completed during one of the most intense years of the artist’s personal life, the 1932 portrait of Picasso’s great muse, Marie-Thérèse Walter, remained on the auction block for four minutes as three collectors over the phones from around the world fought to establish control. But it was an anonymous bidder who named the winning price over the telephone. (The work fell short of the $179.4 million auction high for the artist, established at Christie’s in 2015.)

The evening sale of blue-chip modern and contemporary art from the estate of Emily Fisher Landau, an arts patron who had her own private museum in Long Island City, Queens, was somewhat protected from market volatility because Sotheby’s had assured the owners that it would purchase the Picasso — and nearly 30 other consignments from the estate — if buyers failed to bid above a minimum price. Auctioneers said that over recent weeks they were in a frenzy to secure third-party guarantees that were slightly higher, saving their company from assuming debt on the trove of artworks.

“When it’s hard to compel someone to sell something, you need to put money on the table,” said Benjamin Godsill, an art adviser watching the sale. “The headline for me is keep calm and carry on. There is still a market, even if there weren’t fireworks.”



The sale drew a total of $406.4 million, on estimates of $344.5 million to $430 million. It included a new benchmark for the painter Agnes Martin, whose 1961 “Grey Stone II” went for $18.7 million — the estimate was $6 million to $8 million — in a bidding war between gallerists and collectors in the room that briefly recalled the rabid buying of last year.

“The estimate was extremely conservative, likely because the market had never been tested for a piece like that,” said Betsy Bickar, a senior art adviser at Citi Private Bank.

Putting a Price Tag on Art
Card 1 of 6
Hot commodities. Paintings and other art pieces are regularly sold at auctions around the world. Here are some of the most expensive works to be sold in recent years:

“Shot Sage Blue Marilyn” by Andy Warhol. In May 2022, Warhol’s 1964 silk-screen of Marilyn Monroe’s face sold — in under four minutes of bidding — for about $195 million, the highest price achieved for any American work of art at auction.

“Untitled” by Jean-Michel Basquiat. A 1982 Basquiat painting of a horned devil sold for $85 million with fees in May 2022. It was the third-highest price paid for a Basquiat work; the highest price was recorded in 2017, when one of Basquiat’s coveted large-scale skull paintings sold for $110.5 million at Sotheby’s.

“L’empire des lumières” by René Magritte. The painting, one of Magritte’s famed “Empire of Light” canvases, sold in March 2022 for 59.4 million pounds with fees, or about $79.7 million. The artwork, which juxtaposes a nocturnal lamplit street with a serene daylit sky, is one of the most celebrated and enigmatic images in 20th-century art.

“Diego and I” by Frida Kahlo. An oil painting by Frida Kahlo sold for $34.9 million at Sotheby’s in November 2021, setting an auction benchmark for the most expensive artwork by a Latin American artist. The painting is one of Kahlo’s final self-portraits and an example of the unsettling intimacy that has attracted collectors to her paintings.

“Composition No. II” by Piet Mondrian. A classic grid painting by Mondrian sold at Sotheby’s in November 2022 for $51 million, including fees, topping the previous $50.6 million benchmark for his work. The painting epitomizes the primary colors and geometric rigidity of the de Stijl movement that Mondrian helped define.

But that electricity soon faded when the marquee Picasso arrived on the auction block. The room was quiet as Sotheby’s staff worked the phones to arouse bidders. The winning bid was taken by Brooke Lampley, the company’s chairman and head of global fine art, who organized the sale.

Image
A square painting subtly shaded gray.
Agnes Martin’s “Grey Stone II” went for $18.7 million in a bidding war between art advisers and collectors. The estimate was $6 million to $8 million.Credit...Estate of Agnes Martin/Artists Rights Society, New York; via Sotheby’s

“That was a lot of effort for a foregone conclusion,” the arts journalist Marion Maneker remarked in the room. The Picasso had an irrevocable bid ensuring the lot would sell. The price of an irrevocable bid is typically close to the painting’s low estimate.

ADVERTISEMENT

SKIP ADVERTISEMENT

Financial engineering and tight choreography have become an industry standard as higher prices collide with the headwinds of economic uncertainty. High interest rates and two wars have knocked out a sizable portion of collectors. Sanctions brought after the outbreak of war in Ukraine prevented many Russian collectors from directly participating in the auctions, and more recently, the Israel-Hamas war has diverted the attention of some Middle Eastern collectors.

Asian buyers have also indicated a soft retreat from the market. Last month, an auction of deaccessioned paintings from the Long Museum in Shanghai only achieved a fraction of its high estimate of $150 million. The total after fees was $69.5 million, with 10 artworks failing to sell, including a $7 million picture of a lion by the artist David Hockney. Some analysts attributed the lackluster results to China’s cratering property market.

But there were signs of return at Sotheby’s, where the auction house said a $22 million painting by Mark Rothko and a $1.4 million Jean Arp sculpture were among the pieces that went to Asian collectors.

“This has definitely moved from a seller’s market to buyer’s market,” said Kristine Bell, a senior partner at David Zwirner who monitors auctions for the mega-gallery.

On Tuesday, the “21st Century” evening sale at Christie’s inaugurated the biggest week of the art market with a thud. Premium fees kicked the total to $107.5 million across 41 lots, after two paintings were withdrawn and others failed to gain bidders. The sale estimate range, which does not include fees, was $99 million to $143 million.

Editors’ Picks

What Happens to Illustrators When Robots Can Draw Robots?

A Win-Win ‘Loophole’ Giving Artists Space to Create

What to Know About Seasonal Depression
SKIP ADVERTISEMENT

ADVERTISEMENT

SKIP ADVERTISEMENT

Patterns seen in the uneven spring sales continued this season: Speculation on paintings by “ultracontemporary” artists — those born after 1975 — remained the liveliest part of the evening. Works completed in the last three years by rising artists like Stefanie Heinze, Jenna Gribbon and Jadé Fadojutimi zoomed past their high estimates. (Gribbon, Fadojutimi, Jia Aili and Ilana Savdie achieved auction highs.)

Image
A painting with a kaleidoscopic array of purple hues, with blue and orange accents throughout.
Jadé Fadojutimi’s “A Thistle Throb” was one of the ultracontemporary artworks that sold at Christie’s New York on Tuesday. It went for $1.68 million, with fees.Credit...via Christie’s

But some works from established artists like Cy Twombly, Andy Warhol, Keith Haring and Jeff Koons failed to reach their low estimates.

“They just didn’t feel like once-in-a-lifetime opportunities,” said Godsill, the art adviser. “And it’s important to note that new artists who did succeed were women and artists of color.”

Ahead of Wednesday’s evening auction, Sotheby’s executives boasted about the Picasso, saying that the artist used the painting to unveil his affair simultaneously to his wife and to the world.

“My only question is, should the estimate have been higher?” Lampley mused. “No one has challenged me to say that the estimate is too high.”

The major auction houses will continue to offer paintings through next week as they try to close nearly $1 billion each in total business. Upcoming highlights at Christie’s include two Nazi restitution cases. The Thursday evening sale of 20th-century art at Christie’s includes a Cézanne, estimated at $35 million to $55 million, specifically meant to help a Swiss museum with financial problems; it will also involve some compensation for the family of a Jewish dealer who once owned the painting. A second sale at Christie’s offers several Egon Schiele drawings, returned to a family that has been seeking them for more than a quarter-century, which will fund a scholarship program for young musicians.

ADVERTISEMENT

SKIP ADVERTISEMENT

Both major houses are spicing up their sales with luxury items. Christie’s sold a Jean Royère sofa on Tuesday for $945,000, while Sotheby’s is planning to auction a Ferrari GTO next week for more than $60 million. Both sales will contribute to the grand totals that the companies will promote when the fall auction season ends.

Natasha Degen, professor of art market studies at the Fashion Institute of Technology, said these unorthodox offerings attract new clientele and generate publicity. “It is yet another example of the auction houses wanting to be perceived as central clearinghouses for luxury writ large,” she said. “And if the Ferrari does meet its mark, then Sotheby’s will have another headline-grabbing price.”